Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Paul Eastwick. He's professor
of psychology at the University of California, Davis. And
today we're going to talk about his new book,
Bonded by Evolution, The New Science of Love and
Connection. So Doctor Westwick, welcome back to the show.
It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Yes, thanks so much for having me back.
OK, so, I mean, I would like to start,
I guess that in our first conversation, we've already
touched on this a little bit, but I would
like to start by asking you a more general
question. So, what is the psychology of attraction and
close relationships and what got you interested in studying
it?
Yeah, so, you know, this is the portion of
academic psychology that I consider to be my home.
Um, WE are the folks who study initial attraction
and ongoing close relationships, and the general idea is,
you know, we want. To get people's subjective experiences
of what is it like to be in a
close relationship, what are the challenges that they face,
what are the rewards that people are able to
find by being in close relationships, and how do
those relationships form in the first place. So, often
we're studying how people navigate that entire process and,
you know, it's challenging, but when we do it
well, we're able to study relationships really from the
moment that two people meet all the way up
through the breakup. So it's, it's very challenging, but
it's also a very rewarding topic to explore.
So, but the book is bonded by evolution, and
in the book you mention that at least originally
you were interested in tackling attraction and close relationships
through the lens of evolutionary psychology, correct? So I
mean, What do you make of the way that
evolutionary psychologists approach mating and relationships and uh perhaps
tell us a little bit of what uh I
mean uh drove you perhaps away from that kind
of approach that they have.
Yeah, it's interesting because, you know, when I first
encountered evolutionary psychology, I'm, you know, I'm like in
high school, right? So I'm a long way from,
you know, practicing any of this kind of science
myself. But I remember having these twin thoughts, which
were simply Wow, how fascinating is it that we
can achieve insights into the, you know, why modern-day
relationships are challenging by drawing from evolutionary principles, and
that there are these threads that connect who we
are today to our ancestors as they might have
lived tens or hundreds or thousands of or even
millions of years ago. And at the same time,
The story, at least the story that I was
getting as filtered through, you know, popular media, was,
it it was very grim. It really seemed like,
boy, relationships were tough, and, you know, you kind
of got lucky if you could make one work
even for a little while, and men and women
were forever at odds, and I just remember thinking,
like, gosh, is it really this bleak out there?
And, you know, it would be a while before
I came to sort of figure out how to
resolve the tension in those two ideas, but that
was what hit me at first. What a fascinating
idea, but something feels incomplete about this story.
Mhm. Right, and, and so, I mean, what do
you think about their uh methodology, particularly the way
they study, uh, mating, mating preferences and so on
in men and women based generally on, Surveys and
studying those preferences in the lab, I mean, what
do you make of that?
Yeah, it's so it, it's, it's tough. I mean,
I, I'll be the first to admit like it
can be really hard to study attraction, to study
relationship formation, especially, and to do it well. When
I entered the field about 20 years ago, I
remember being a little surprised that the methods were
As I, I guess, uniform as they were, you
know, when people started studying, like, oh, what makes
for somebody appealing as an attraction partner or as
a close relationship partner, they, they were doing this
in the early part of the 20th century, and
they were passing out surveys that asked people to
like rate how much you care about various traits.
Now, I think we can learn a lot from
doing methods like that. But that was like the
1930s, and when I entered grad school in the
2000s, that was like a lot of what we
were still doing. And it just seemed like we
kinda got stuck in some paradigms that were pretty
simple, like, oh, like, here's a depiction of a
person, you know, an online profile, somebody you'll never
meet, what do you think of this person? And
we hadn't really gotten into studying people's real relationships
as they unfolded over time. Now, later, I would
discover that there were some people out there that
were doing this, but that's what I remember really
sticking with me was the sense of like, oh,
we've been doing it like this for, for 80
years, and I, I think by now, We could
maybe make some of these studies a little bit
more realistic and a little bit more immersive.
So, I, I mean, what do you make, um,
what do you think perhaps are the limitations of
evolutionary psychology in this domain of mating and romantic
relationships?
Yeah, so it, it's a good question. And the,
the way that I talk about this in the
book, and I, I think we'll, we'll later hit
uh these in a little bit more detail, but
I think there are sort of three misconceptions or
exaggerations that we get from the popular evolutionary psychological
story. One of them is the idea that like
mate value is the end all be all. The
second is that men and women are really different.
And the third one is that you can kind
of specialize in uh short-term relationships or you can
specialize in long-term relationships, but like, you kind of
gotta pick a lane. I think those are the
three big ideas that have turned out to have
some major shortcomings as the science has, you know,
advanced over the last, you know, 10 or 20
years.
Right, and we're certainly going to get a little
bit later into the issues with all of those
ideas, with mate value, with sex differences, and so
on. Uh, WHAT do you think are the most
common misconceptions we are told about romantic relationships? I
mean, not considering just, uh, evolutionary psychology, but in
our sort of culture, what, what we tend to
we.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, no, it's, it's a great question.
And it, it was actually one of the things
that working on this book really helped me to
see a little bit more clearly, like, you know,
I, I understand how to read the science and
critique the science and, and all of this is
great and this is what scientists do and I've
enjoyed being part of that process. But I realized
too, when you go out there and you just
talk with everyday, you know, people who are looking
around and paying attention, is that some of these
evy ideas, it's like they got, you know, squeezed
through, you know, a, a, a toothpaste tube, and
what what comes out the other side is like
this funhouse mirror version of evolutionary psychology. Where, you
know, you get stuff like the rules, right? I
mean, you know, that was the 90s where we
got the rules. That was a famous book that
basically was like, women, you need to play coy
to attract a man, but like, also to have
a good relationship and basically, sort of, like, never
let him see your vulnerabilities. I mean, advice like
this. IS, you know, according to the Sciences of
Close Relationships, absolutely bananas. I mean, it would be
hard to point to something that is more off-base
than that. But there's a bunch of examples like
this. I mean, in our culture, everywhere, you see,
well, oh, you know, is, is she like somebody
who's just good for a fling or is she
somebody you'd wanna bring home to meet your parents?
And these distinctions um really have very little support
in the science and You know, part of writing
this book made me realize like, oh, I think,
I think people need to hear this.
Yeah, I agree. So what have we really evolved
to look for in a potential partner? I mean,
what do we really want out of attachment bonds?
Yeah, so, so I, I think the most concise
way that I can put this is that what
people evolved to do in the evolutionary story that
I take from the science is that people evolved
to find compatibility. In small networks. We evolved in
a context where you didn't know that many other
people. And among these very few people that you're
gonna try to make something work with, what people
were mainly on the lookout for was more, not
like, who's the best. But rather, who do I
click with especially well, and in large part that's
because, well, we would go on to form these
longer term interdependent relationships with people for the purpose
of raising these very, very helpless offspring that humans
tend to have. And so, That process of like
finding somebody that you click with very well, because
ideally, you're gonna form a close attached relationship with
that person, I think that is a more useful
way to think about, you know, if you want
like sort of a guiding principle for human mating,
I would put it in that territory.
And I, I mean, a, a sort of a
broader question, why have we evolved to bond even
in the first place?
Yeah, right, I mean, it's a fascinating question, and,
and we're very different than many of our closest
relatives among the other primates, right? I mean, chimpanzees
don't bond in the way humans do, nor do
gorillas, you know. Nor do orangutans, probably gibbons, come
the closest, but we evolved in the last couple
million years, the ability to bond with romantic partners,
and of course, other close people in our lives.
The main reason why is that we are social
creatures. We, we, we need to be around other
people. We need other people to have our backs,
or we simply wouldn't have survived when we were
out, you know, trying to get by as hunter-gatherers.
But, Attachment bonds, you see this throughout different portions
of the animal kingdom, when it's very important to
have high levels of investment in offspring by both
mating partners, where you need both males and females
to be contributing to offspring or those offspring are
not gonna make it. So, part of the reason
you see attachments between adult romantic partners is is
sort of those twin reasons. One is that, well,
we need support from close others around us, or
else our need to belong isn't met and we
aren't going to thrive as people. But also there's
this practical, you know, very evolutionarily sensible reason too,
that being in an attachment bond, being in an
interdependent relationship, that's likely to work out better for
the offspring that you're have to having to invest
very heavily in.
OK, so I guess that we can already tackle
one of the two big issues in regards to,
uh, the story, let's call it that way, that
comes out of evolutionary psychology that you mentioned earlier,
so. When it comes to sex differences, are there
really big sex differences when it comes to mate
preferences to what we look out for in a
partner, what we prefer, or do you think that
what we tend to get from evolutionary psychology in
terms of sex differences is a bit exaggerated?
I think it's quite exaggerated. Now here when we're
talking about mate preferences. Um, I'm gonna use that
term to refer to the traits or the attributes
that men and women want in a partner. And
I'm, I'm somewhat agnostic about whether we're talking about
initial attraction settings or whether we're talking about ongoing
close relationships. Uh, I think my conclusions apply the
same on this point in both cases. But if
we're thinking about what are the traits you want
in a partner. Um, IT is very true that
men and women will say they want different things,
but I think all of the work that we've
seen looking at what men and women actually want
in a romantic partner, it turns out that those
sex differences are very, very small. OK. Do you,
do you want me to do, do you want
me to do more detail about like what,
how we do that, yes, yes, please,
yeah, so. In the paradigms that capture what I
would call what men and women say they want
in a partner, these paradigms are very straightforward and,
you know, you, you can do this at home.
Um, YOU come up with a questionnaire like, oh,
how much do you want your ideal partner to
have attributes like attractive or um ambitious, uh, have
high earning potential, be sexy, OK. Um, THOSE kinds
of attributes, you'll see gender differences such that men
will say they care about attractiveness and sexiness more
than women, and women will say they care about
ambition, success, earning potential more than men. It's not,
not like every woman says that. It's not like,
you know, many, many men and women don't fit
that depiction, but on average, that is what you
see. All right. But, That's sort of, you know,
people's ideas about what they want. What I wanna
know is, if you're meeting a set of women,
let's say, and you, you know, they're gonna vary
in, let's say, how attractive they are, or they're
gonna vary in how ambitious they are. I want
to know, are you especially drawn to, are you
especially attracted to, let's say, the ambitious rather than
the less ambitious women? To what extent is ambition
an aphrodisiac for you when we're talking about the
real people who you might be meeting? Sometimes we
call that a revealed preference. It's, you know, how
much you like the trait as you experience that
trait among a set of real people. And speed
dating was a useful way to look at this.
Speed dating is not the only way to look
at this, but it's one very useful way, and
I think a very legible way for people. Because
you can imagine, oh, I'm gonna, you know, meet
these 10 people, and let's say 5 are ambitious
and 5 are not. How much do I like
the ambitious folks more than the less ambitious folks?
When you do studies this way, what you see
is that, not surprisingly, the women uh like the
ambitious guys a little bit more than the unambitious
guys. But what you also see is that the
men like the ambitious women, a little more than
the unambitious women, and that gender difference is non-existent
in study after study, those gender differences are reliably
zero. I mean, they are, it is not there.
So, that's why we often talk about this interesting
phenomenon where you get reasonable size gender differences when
you ask people, oh, you know, draw up your
ideal partner for me, what does it look like?
But when we look at how much traits actually
appeal to people in the moment when they're thinking
about real-life people that they've met or that they're
in a relationship with, we don't see those same
gender differences for those traits.
OK, so, uh, why is it then that if
we ask men and women, of course I'm not
saying that it's every time the same way they
give the same answer and every man and every
woman gives the same answer, but why is it
that they're at least in surveys. We get uh
those average differences.
Yeah, this is a good question, and in some
ways, this is the vanguard of the science right
now. So I, I can tell you my suspicions,
although there, there's only like a couple studies along
these lines, but here are a couple answers. One
is that when people tell you what they want
in a partner, Um, it's kind of hard for
people to separate two things. One is, how much
will that trait ultimately appeal to me, like, do
people have insight into their revealed preferences? That's a
little tricky for people. Um, BUT also what people
do, and they do this very easily, is they
kind of reiterate a stereotype or a description of
what members of their preferred gender are like. So,
what I mean by that is that, you know,
you asked me like, how much do I like
these traits, and so I bring to mind like
an ideal woman. Well, an ideal woman is more
characterized by attractiveness, for example. Um, THOSE traits that
I've been talking about, attractiveness and earning potential, those
are attributes that do differ by gender. In other
words, uh, women will tell you that they are
more attractive than men, than what men will say
about themselves. Also, independent coders will agree that on
average, women are just more attractive than men are.
This is, this is a gender difference. It's a
kind of an overlooked one. Um, AT the same
time, like, you know, it's still true that men
earn more than women, so I think that might
be a stereo, and I, I use the word
stereotype in a purely descriptive way here, that men
are describing that stereotype, like, well, they don't think
women are likely to be as ambitious. So when
people describe their partner preferences, I think there's like
stereotypey stuff that sneaks in there that isn't necessarily
connected to what we desire. You're just describing what
people of the other gender are like. Um, SO
I think that's part of it. Um, I've also
seen a, a real, really interesting recent paper suggesting
that, Part of the reason men say they care
about attractiveness more is linked to the fact that
men on average have a stronger sex drive. So,
it's like an epi phenomenon of that gender difference.
And, and this is, I think, another important point
is that many times when you see a gender
difference, it's actually a reflection of like this other
thing that we already know about. And so, I,
I think that also could be uh happening here
as well.
OK, OK, so, uh, let's talk a little bit
about what makes a relationship successful in the long
term, particularly, because we tend to hear very commonly
that there's sort of these, you know, calibrated mix
of similarities and differences for a romantic relationship to
be successful. Um, IS there anything to that? I
mean, is that true at all?
Um, IT'S tricky because it's not like you can
assess the attributes of different people and try to
figure out who is gonna be able to make
it work because, oh, they share all the right
attributes, and, you know, who's gonna be a terrible
match because they don't share the right attributes, or
they or they share some attributes that's gonna make
their pairing particularly toxic. It would be really, really
wonderful if we could do things like this. But
the reality is, um, it's, it's been far harder
than even I think we anticipated 5 or 10
years ago to document who is likely to end
up being compatible with whom, from the things that
people would report about themselves. Ahead of time. So,
in many ways, you know, it, it's, it is
another one of the great mysteries that I try
to unpack in the book is that, you know,
we believe that compatibility is really central. And you
can see the importance of compatibility in a number
of ways, but trying to document exactly who is
compatible with whom is remarkably difficult. And, you know,
it's like one of the reasons that I'm like
generally really excited about this topic in a, in
a scientific way.
OK, so, uh, do we have, uh, I guess
that we don't have a good understanding, but do
we have at least an understanding of what makes
a relationship successful in the long term?
Oh, absolutely. I mean, if you're following relationships over
time, you can certainly point to, you know, the
various features that are gonna make some relationships, uh,
more caring, closer, um, sort of more effective at
supporting each other than others, and, You know, it,
I, I, I think it's useful to point to,
uh, these are, um, insights that come from attachment
theory. Um, IT'S useful to think about things like,
um, who can you go to when you feel
like things are not going your way and you
need support. You need somebody to like be there
for you, to experience a sense of being unconditionally
accepted. So you can kind of gather yourself and,
you know, get up off the mat. That is
a key feature of close relationships, um, that is,
is very, very important. So people who can support
each other in that way, those relationships are much
more likely to be successful in the long term.
And you got the mirror image of that same
thing, where who's gonna be there to celebrate my
successes? Who's gonna be there to push me to
do the especially difficult thing, even though I might
fail, but I'm excited about it, but I'm nervous
about how it's gonna turn out, like, having somebody
who's got your back in that way too, is
also very important. Um, SOMETIMES We call these things,
um, uh, safe haven and secure base. Those are
the attachment terms. But really, what it means is,
who's gonna be there when I'm down and who's
gonna be there to celebrate my successes? And, you
know, if you can point to relationships where people
can do this well, that is an absolutely central
predictor that uh things are, are gonna go well
in the future.
Something that people always also talk a lot about
is about types. I mean, oh, that person is
my type, that person over there is not my
type. Is there really a type of person that
is sort of the best mate for us?
Yeah, not really, I mean this is, and, and
this is kind of connects back to some of
the issues with the gender differences, right, because, Well,
all right. So, maybe men and women, like, you
know, their insights about what they want in a
partner isn't quite right, but let's take gender out
of it for a second. Surely, if Ricardo, you
say that you really want a partner who's especially
intelligent, and I want a partner who's Especially adventurous.
Well, if I, you know, set you up with
somebody who's very intelligent, and, you know, I'm set
up with somebody who's very adventurous, um, that's gonna
make us happier than if I had accidentally switched
to what we said we wanted and, and ended
up with the inverse partners. Well, it turns out,
It actually doesn't matter all that much. In other
words, the things you say you're looking for, I
mean, if I ask you to draw up what
are your three key deal breakers in a partner,
um, yeah, you're probably likely to like somebody more
who has those attributes, you know, let's say, OK,
somebody who's intelligent and somebody who's successful and somebody
who's sexy. So it's true, you'll like that person
more, but if you had, again, accidentally gotten somebody
with the three other attributes that I would have
picked, you'd be just as happy. And so, that's
why we talk about, like, people not really having
a type. It's not that people are just like
listing traits randomly, people are listing traits that are
desirable, but when they do that, they don't really
seem to have unique insight into what it is
that they want specifically. Sometimes I like to use
a restaurant metaphor, and just imagine, you know, you
and your friends at the table are ordering off
the same menu, you order different things, but when
the waiter comes, the waiter mixes up the orders,
and you all end up with uh, with different
dishes, not what you. Ordered. Well, if that's like
relationships, then what would happen is, you'd all eat
your food and you'd all be equally happy, and
it wouldn't have mattered that the waiter messed up
your order. So, I, I, I do think this
gets to the problem of like, why we don't
really have a type in the end.
OK, so let's tackle uh the another one of
the three pillars of what you call the evil
script in your book or the script coming from
evolutionary psychology. Do we have made value?
Yeah, I think main value is this idea, like,
boy, is this thing huge out there. I would
say that we have a mate value, and it
matters in initial attraction settings. So when people are
initially getting to know one another, it is true
that we seem to get sized up based on
our observable attributes. We consider some people to be
the, you know, very desirable tens, and other people
are the more middling sixes, and some people are
the undesirable ones or twos. So, um, in initial
attraction settings, there's some of that going on. Um,
I, I think it's less of that than we're
commonly led to believe, but there is some amount
of mate value that is tangible and present in
initial interactions. I think the kicker though, and the
thing that I would surprise a lot of people.
Is that in order for that kind of mate
value to matter, what it really requires is that
people agree about how desirable somebody is. Like, when
I talk about like, oh, this person's a 10,
if, if people don't agree that this person's a
10, right, if there aren't a bunch of people
who are like, oh, yeah, like she's super hot.
If, if people aren't agreeing, then that's a meaningless
statement that I'm making. And, and again, what, in
initial attraction settings, yeah, there's agreement. There's agreement about
who is attractive and who is middling attractiveness and
who's not attractive in initial attraction settings. But what's
fascinating is that as people get to know each
other, that consensus goes down. In other words, when
people have spent a lot of time in each
other's presence, we agree less and less about, like,
who the most desirable people are. At first, everybody,
you know, wants to date Naomi cause she's super
hot, but after a few weeks, some people Also
thinks she's super hot, and some people have kind
of cooled on her. Maybe they don't like her
sense of humor. Maybe, I don't know, there's, you
know, something else that, you know, she doesn't seem
that kind to other people. But for whatever reason,
a few people have now soured on her, and
now you see more disagreement with time. What that
means is that there's more room for quote unquote
6s to date quote unquote 10s, because, well, the
10 has a very, very favorable opinion of the
person that everybody else would uh consider a 6.
So it's like mate value wears off as people
get to know. EACH other. And I, I think
for a lot of people, that's a good thing
and kind of a reassuring message because it means
like, hey, even if you don't have it all
going for you in an initial impression setting, you
know, with time, you know, a lot of people
can find, you know, can find their niche and
can find other people who will ultimately find you
appealing.
What do you make of the distinction that evolutionary
psychologists make between short-term and long-term forms of human
mating, and I mean, is it really that some
people prefer dating short-term and other people long-term?
Yeah, I think this is a really tricky concept,
because on the one hand, as you like look
around the world, it seems obvious that, well, yeah,
like some relationships are casual, and there, there are
one night stands, and we see those, and those
seem very different in many ways from when you
look at a long term ongoing close relationship. And
I think it's tempting to think, well, this must
be because people have like different modes of mating,
and what they kind of figure out as they
grow up and get some experience is like, OK,
I, I'm really good at the long-term thing. So,
I'm gonna focus my efforts there and try to
land a long-term partner, versus, oh, like, I seem
to be pretty desirable, so maybe I can end
up having a lot of short-term relationships and have
success that way. And it leads us to think
about a dimension, where you're either good at the
long-term thing on the one hand, or you're good
at the short-term thing on the other hand. Um,
THAT is not a great way of thinking about,
uh, the, the distribution of people out there in
the world. Um, AND I say that for a
number of reasons, but probably the, the clearest illustration
of why this isn't helpful is that there's really
no indication at all that being the kind of
person who's, you know, sexy and is maybe desirable
initially in attractive. SETTINGS, there's no indication at all
that these people are gonna be worse long-term partners.
And then on the flip side, if you look
at the people who come across as very kind,
very warm, very sensitive, the attributes that we would
associate with long-term relationships. There's no indication that these
folks do any better or worse in the short-term
realm. They, many of them have had plenty of
short-term relationships, and many of them have not had
a whole lot of short-term relationships. So these things
end up being kind of independent. Of each other.
And ultimately, I think it's more useful to think
about a process of uncertainty reduction as people um
get into relationships and kind of figure out where
a given relationship is going. Because many times, short-term
relationships are the relationships that kinda didn't go anywhere.
Like, you had some amount of sexual attraction, but
that was really it. Whereas long-term relationships are commonly
things where, you know, you didn't know where this
was going, you spent some time together, you felt
attracted to each other, and then it kind of
kept escalating. So, this is why we often encourage
people to think about relationships as these arcs over
time, that can be short or can be long
or can be anywhere in between. But it's not
about like seeking certain kinds of people for certain
kinds of relationships, that that really isn't all that
well supported by the science.
What do you think about the idea of a
mating market?
Yeah, yeah, I think that the, the mating market
feels very prominent that day, and I think, I
think the apps are reinforcing this to some extent,
because boy, does that feel like a market. I
mean, there you are, you're putting yourself out there,
uh, you're literally a product for somebody else to
say yes or no to, and that's gonna determine,
uh, ultimately how well you do. Um But this
idea is, it's tightly connected to the concept of
mate value, right? Because in a mating market, well,
how well are you gonna do on that market?
It's gonna depend on, on what your value is,
and it's really gonna get people to focus on
how they fit into that hierarchy. Are you a
10, are you a 6, are you a 2?
I think if one lives one's life, I don't
recommend this, but if one lives one's life by
like trying to hit on strangers, or just using
the apps, trying to pick up people on the
apps, you will experience attraction as a market-like concept,
but, I, I am always compelled to point out
that actually doesn't reflect very well the environment in
which people evolved, which would have been an environment
where, again, it was a small set of people,
but you were gonna know each other over a
long period of time. That's a lot more time
to figure out, not like, oh, who's the best
and who's the worst, but rather, who do I
click with especially well? Where is their compatibility here?
By focusing on things like compatibility, we get out
of that market mindset, or at least we can
escape it a little bit and not worry so
much about like, oh, who's the best and who's
the worst, but think about, hey, like, you know,
this is where the fit is really good, and
this is somebody who makes me really happy.
You know, now that I'm thinking about it, uh,
do you think that the fact that, uh, I
mean, usually, or that we evolved in environments where
we, uh, And knew people for a very long
time, learned about them for a very long time,
that perhaps that's one of the reasons why many
times we end up having relationships with, for example,
uh, co-workers or people we went to university with,
or I mean people who we spend more time
with,
uh, it's. It is such a profound truism about,
about the, the attraction and close relationships literature. These
effects of proximity, it is hard to believe how
huge these effects are. That is, the more time
you spend with somebody, the more opportunities you have
to interact with them are powerfully associated with the
likelihood that at a minimum that you'll end up
being friends with each other and also potentially the
likelihood of forming a relationship with somebody. Um. And
part of that is due to a, you know,
sort of familiarity breeds liking effect. This is a
pretty powerful effect that you see fairly regularly, but
I think part of it too is what I'm
talking about with respect to mate value, that it's
not just that we like people a little more
as we get to know them, but on average,
we start to disagree more. About various people, how
much we like them. So, we like each other
more on average, but also much more disagreement in
there, that really presents a lot of opportunities for
people to find partners. So, the environments where, yeah,
you're like meeting people nearby, running into them fairly
often. I mean, I recognize I kind of sound
like an old man here, being like, oh, it
was like better in the old days. But like,
there really was some wisdom to the idea that,
hey, you're gonna run into these people repeatedly in
small groups, and this is how a lot of
people are gonna find partners that, that we've like
industrialized this. We've made it a massive market and
we've put it online and you spend 90 minutes
a day swiping. I, I don't think this is
a recipe for happiness for a lot of people.
Mhm. So, uh, uh, you present in the book
an alternative to the marketplace idea, so which is,
which you call compatibility driven bonding. Uh, uh, TELL
us, I mean, you've been, uh, telling us about
compatibility, but what is compatibility actually? How does it
work?
Yeah, so, the way I think about compatibility, I
actually start with a very mathematical way of thinking
about it, which is, it's the connection that I
have to you, that can't be explained by, you
know, I'm like a selective person or, or an
unselective person, it could go out. WAY. So it's
not explained by me alone, and it's not explained
by you alone. Are you popular? Are you unpopular?
OK. So, it's like, once we take out who
I am in general and who you are in
general, is there something special that I feel for
you above and beyond all that? That's the portion
of attraction that's due to compatibility. There's something special.
Between us. That's a different, you know, we can
identify that, that that's there, even if we can't
quite explain where it comes from. Why is it
that I felt that way to you and not
somebody else. But in general, that's what I'm talking
about with compatibility, that there's unique connections between people
that other people don't share. I, I would ask
people this thought experiment when I, I want people
to get a real like sense of what I'm
talking about when it comes to compatibility. I think
people commonly have the experience, that if they think
about a group of mixed gender friends, and let's,
you know, imagine the various couples that exist in
that group. I bet there are a lot of
people in that group that you like a lot,
but you, it's not like you'd be excited to
trade romantic partners with any of them. I think
it's really cool that, you know, uh Amanda and
George are dating, and I think that's great. I,
I don't quite understand what he sees in her,
but, you know, that's great for them. That idea
that like, actually, like, people find things in each
other where they think each other are the greatest
and other people are like, OK, if you say
so, that's kind of what I mean by compatibility.
It's the idea that once we get to know
people, we aren't all just trying, you know, vying
for the most desirable person. A lot of times,
you know, we look at other people's relationships and,
and, you know, and we think like, oh, that's
great for you, I'm happy for you, but I
don't quite share your opinion.
Uh, WHAT do you think about the idea of
assortative mating?
Yeah, so assorted meaning is important. Um, IT kind
of comes in, in two forms that I think
are worth disentangling. It's, it's one of these terms
that can mean a bunch of different things. Sometimes
it refers to demographics. It refers to the fact
that educated people will tend to get together with
other educated people, and, you know, rich people will
get together with other rich people. And most of
that demographic sorting. IS because of these mechanisms we
were talking about, these proximity mechanisms, familiarity mechanisms, who
are you more likely to meet? Um, THERE'S a
paper I'm fond of quoting that actually refers to
the, the 1860s in, in Britain, um, the reign
of Queen. Victoria. So, uh, Queen Victoria would hold
these balls, where, uh, many of the young men
and women would get together and meet at these
balls, and this was Queen Victoria's way of trying
to create couples among the aristocracy. And yes, this
is the plot of Bridgerton. This is actually drawn
from real life. Um, BUT there were a few
years where, uh, Queen Victoria was grieving and didn't
hold the balls. And so what the young people
did during these years is they said, like, well,
I guess I gotta hit the town. Instead of
just meeting the other rich folks, I gotta, you
know, go meet some poor folks, uh, you know,
gotta leave the castle walls, and they did, and
then, again, because proximity and familiarity, they marry these
more common folks, and it actually changes the trajectory
of wealth in Britain. That wealth gets more redistributed
as a result of this. So, that's a great
example of demographic assortative mating, that it, because of
who people meet, things like wealth and education tend
to concentrate. There's a separate kind of assortive mating
that's based on things like attractiveness. The fact that
attractive people tend to get together with other attractive
people, and that right there is probably the best
evidence that mate value plays an important role. Again,
I think it's easy to overestimate the power of
assortative mating. Um, IT'S not like gargantuan, it, it's
very much present, um, a useful thought experiment to
understand assortative mating. It's like, oh, if there was
a woman standing next to two men and you
had to guess which one was her partner, if
you pick the one that was closest to her
level of attractiveness, you'd be right about 70% of
the time. But, you know, that's far from determinative,
but, but that's where you're seeing. Uh, SOME of
the, the mate value marketplace forces at work, because,
oh, initially she was more attractive, so if she
got together with somebody, fairly, uh, you know, shortly
after meeting them, she was probably also able to
attract somebody else who was pretty appealing at first.
Right. So one of the things uh that we
have to talk about here is the fact that
of course when we talk about the science of
close relationships, uh, many times or even most of
the time we focus on heterosexual couples, right? But
there uh there's also homosexual couples. OR same gender
couples. So, um, do we have, um, um, I
mean, good enough science on them? The sexual orientation
make a difference in terms of, uh, how compatibility
works and, uh, what makes relationships successful?
Yeah, it's, it's an interesting question. A lot of
what we've seen, I, I, I would suggest, uh,
We see many of the similar conclusions apply. So,
in other words, when we find that mixed gender
relationships tend to do especially well when people can
support each other, when they, you know, support each
other in terms of uh uh taking on new
challenges, uh, and, and overcoming setbacks, these conclusions uh
routinely apply. To same-gender relationships as well. So, it's
like many of the broad principles still hold. There
are many cases where, when we can disentangle, um,
who is, you know, the, the gender of the
first person in the couple and the gender of
the second person, we can achieve a whole bunch
of fascinating new insights. So, for example, I mean,
this is just one of many, but, Um, when
I'm, um, sort of helping people to understand better
ways of dating, and that it's possible to have
mixed gender networks that you're a part of and
meet friends of friends of friends, and that's how
you meet dating partners rather than through the apps.
Well, you know, people who are members of sexual
minority groups are like, no, duh, like, we've been
doing that for a long time. Like, that is
routinely how uh gay men, lesbian women, bisexual folks,
how they've been meeting other people, and they've long
shown, hey, you know what, sometimes, like, you get
together with somebody and you break up with them,
but they're still kind of in your network. And
it's true that uh people with um minority sexual
identities, They're more likely to to inhabit social networks
with people who are exes. But they also illustrate
how that doesn't necessarily have to be a debilitating
thing. I think a lot of times people think
like, yeah, but I wouldn't wanna have to like
keep encountering my ex because we share the same
friends and, you know, gay and lesbian folks are
like, hold my beer, we do this all the
time.
Uh, WHAT do you make of research on mate
preferences that is done on dating apps? I mean,
uh, do, should we take, uh, data coming from
dating apps seriously or not?
I think it's useful for illustrating what it's like
to be on the apps, right? I mean, if
you, if you wanna understand that, uh, often demoralizing
process, um, it, it's useful in that sense. Um.
People do spend a lot of time on the
apps. These are a part of how we find
partners now. I think trying to unpack some of
the enormous gender differences you see on the apps.
I mean, the way I usually talk about the
apps is that they Exaggerate gender differences. They take
modest gender differences in real life, like the fact,
for example, that women are a little bit more
selective than men. I mean, this is true. If
you look at uh live speed dating events, for
example, you'll see that women, you know, they say
yes to the men about 1/3 of the time
at mixed-gender speed dating events, and men say yes
at about 50/50. But if you look at the
apps, Uh, men are still saying yes at about
50/50, and for women, it goes from being, you
know, 1 out of every 3 to 1 out
of every 20, they say yes to. I mean,
it, that is an absolutely enormous gender difference. So,
if that's how people are behaving on the apps,
a wild exaggeration of the gender differences that we
see in real life, well, we need to understand
that, but we need to understand it for the
purposes of understanding. Uh, WHAT'S happening on these apps?
How can we make them better? How can we
better help people to find connections? I think it
has even less relevance to like, for example, the
environment in which we evolved, relative to even the
old ways of studying things, asking people what they
want. I mean, people did not evolve in markets
that look anything like what you see on a,
on a modern dating app.
What do you make of terms like high value
man and high value woman?
Yeah, yeah, this, and this is where some of
these classic evolutionary psychological concepts have, have gotten a
lot of traction online and have really, you know,
it, it's become a, a, a set of fun
house mirrors out there. So, um, Uh, I think
this is pretty damaging, because again, it reduces people
to a collection of attributes that can be evaluated
by others, probably strangers. Again, that's the model that
people have in mind with this. It's not like,
are your friends frustrated with how much You know,
you only go to them, you know, when you
need help and you aren't there. This isn't about
like, oh, like your friends have some tips for
how you could be a better friend. This is
like, when people take an initial look at you,
when they meet you for the first time, or
even worse when they're like reading like your CV
of attributes, do they think you are valuable or
not? Uh, THIS is, um, a pretty bad way
to think about what is going to make for
romantic success. I'm not saying that there's nothing to
it, like, you know, people wanna, you, like, you
know, work out, like, eat healthy, like, these are
good ideas. You can do things to make yourself
more initially appealing, but I think people like, stop
there. They think like, well, I just got to
be a higher value and that's gonna do it.
And ultimately, I think that even if people can
improve their quote unquote value, and again, what I
mean by that is, make yourself initially more appealing
by doing things to boost your attractiveness or your
initial appeal. That stuff's gonna be pretty small. It's
gonna be marginal compared to the other more social,
more network-related things that people could be doing, if
what they wanna do is find more social connections
and hopefully find a partner.
Um, DO you think that, uh, I mean, uh,
I'm asking you this, I'm, or I'm going to
ask you this because this is also something that
we are very frequently from, uh, pop, uh, evolutionary
psychology. Uh, DO people really need to change themselves
in order to correspond as best as possible to
an ideal mate to be able to date and
mate?
Yeah, I don't think this is a helpful way
to think about it at all. In fact, you
know, if you look at the close relationships literature,
the, the people who study ongoing relationships, in many
ways, you, you get the inverse message, which is
that, Um, being in a relationship with somebody else
that you're close to, it, it could be a
romantic partner, but it doesn't have to be, right?
It can be close friends. These are the things
that change us and help us grow closer to
the person we want to be. So, it is
in many ways the opposite. You don't sort of
go into the lab and, you know, change yourself
into this ideal form and then come out and
everybody loves you. It's, you grow through your relationships
with other people. Discovering new things, by like, taking
feedback, like the example I gave earlier, like, you're
not being a good friend when you X, Y,
Z. Like, these are important things that people need
to hear, but this is how people grow. It's
through relationships. So, you know, honestly, for, for a
lot of people who are struggling, I'm, I often
want to encourage them, like, I just want you
to like go have friends and hang out with
people, like, maybe don't worry so much about the
romantic desirability part of it, just be part of
some networks again, like be part of some friendship
groups again, go spend time with other people in
person. And let that process help you grow, rather
than this very intentional, like, I gotta rack up
all the right attributes to be appealing. I, I
think most people will find, will find that process
to be kind of frustrating.
And also, I, I mean, I hope that this
is also backed by science, but I also get
the sense that many times it is through uh
being open and vulnerable with other people that we
make deep connections, right? It's through Uh, uh, uh,
uh, being, uh, uh, I guess courageous enough to
expose our vulnerabilities to other people that people get
to like us even more and vice versa,
100%, I mean. I, I think it's, again, if
you, if you really buy into this, there's a
hierarchy of value and like, you gotta be at
the top, what, what often comes with that is
the suggestion that like, you gotta wall yourself off,
OK? You gotta be very protective, you gotta show
off. The best version of yourself and do not
show any weakness, OK? All of this is part
of the same, I, I think, deeply misleading message
about the way relationships actually work. Relationships ultimately require
vulnerability. Now, you can't just go around being vulnerable
with everybody all the time. That's not a recipe
for success, but I, I think on average, people's
intuitions are way misaligned with this, that often we
need to be more vulnerable with people than we
instinctively are. Um, I point to some research showing
that, Uh, you know, one of the, the best
experimental interventions to, um, to, to sort of gin
up more liking between two people when they're initially
meeting for the first time, is you get them
to answer questions that encourage more vulnerability, more honest
reflection, get them to talk about their deepest fears.
This is sometimes called the fast friends procedure. It's
been around for decades, and it's very reliable. But
if you can get people to talk about Their
vulnerabilities. Also, talk about what they like about this
other person that maybe they met an hour ago,
like, really get them to open up in that
way. Huge boosts in liking when you get people
to go through this kind of procedure. So, more
vulnerability rather than less, you know, less grandstanding. These
are the, are the roots. The, the, like, popular,
like, like, I gotta be tough, I gotta be
the best, show no weakness. This, this is not
the way.
What do you make of the red pill community
and the manosphere more broadly, because I, I, I
mean, I mean, at least me personally, when I
look at it, I think it's extremely toxic and
uh for the most part a cesspool of bad
relationship ideas. Yeah,
right, and this, this is the. Pinnacle, right? I
mean, this is, this is the pinnacle of the
bad ideas. And this is how, how, um, a
lot of these, right, the mate value and hierarchy
ideas have spun wildly out of control. So if
you think about like the, the black pill, the,
sorry, the red pill concept that you mentioned, the
red pill concept, it really is like, oh, you
know, again, it comes from the Matrix. This idea
that, oh, I've taken the red pills, and now
I see reality, and now I see that it's
all about like my desirable attributes. A lot of
times this is wrapped up in some misogynist ideas
about like, well, women's preferences are the things that
matter. And so, you gotta fit women's preferences. And
they've got all the power, and men are kind
of helpless in the face of it all. And
so, a red pill solution to the problem of
mating would be things like, well, you know, work
out, learn how to be the alpha guy who
all the women will want. And again, I think
this is mostly misguided. I'm not gonna say like
don't work out. I'm not gonna say don't eat
healthy. These are useful things to do, but that's
about where that kind of advice would end for
me. Um, BUT it all gets then wrapped up
in a lot of the, like, misogynistic and hate-filled
ideas that you see online, and, you know, this
is what we've been living with for the last
10 to 15 years is, you know, uh, the
really nasty bad ideas get spread very easily online,
and there were folks uh who saw some of
these evolutionary inspired ideas and said, well, yeah, you
know, we can, we can make that fit. Uh,
SOME of our, uh, you know, nastier ideas about
the relationships between men and women, and so we've
got this whole, you know, horror show version of
Ev Psych now that exists online.
Yeah, and it can be very dangerous in terms
of the ideas that it that the red pill
community and other parts of the manosphere convey about,
uh, women particularly and all the misogyny surrounding it,
right,
yeah, right, I think, um, I, I think it's,
uh, I'm not saying like, oh, it's inevitable that
if you like believe in gender differences and you
believe in mate value, then you end up at
this toxic place. Um, BUT I also think we
haven't been that good at explaining to people why
A + B doesn't lead to C. And this
is, I think, wrapped up in some deeper philosophical
challenges when it comes to advancing evolutionary psychological ideas.
And the one that I like to point to
is, um, it's actually something that evolutionary psychologists have
not spent a lot of time on. And it's
the concept of biological determinism. So, so geneticists have
to deal with this stuff all the time. Biological
determinism, is, you know, the way that a geneticist
would talk about it is the idea like, oh,
you've got this set of genes, and therefore, this
outcome is gonna happen, and there's not much you
can do to change it. So, it's as if
there's few points of intervention, few places to intervene
between the biological cause and the outcome that, you
know, you might not want. Um, BIOLOGICAL determinism is
just not a useful idea, full stop. Because, uh,
sometimes biological things are easy to change, and sometimes
biological things are hard to change. And sometimes learned
things are hard to change, and sometimes learned things
are easy to change. So whether a thing is
learned or biological, it does not bear on how
hard a thing is to change. So the problem
that starts to happen As these evy ideas get
filtered into the popular culture, as people hear, oh,
like, men evolved to experience a lot of, you
know, desire for sexual variety. They want to have
sex with many different women. Well, well, I guess
there's nothing we can do about that. But that
conclusion, there's nothing we can do about it, that,
that is, that does not follow at all from
any sort of statement about how biological it is
that men do or do not have a strong
desire for sexual variety. So, these are some of
like the, the challenges that we need to start
addressing better. We need to give people the tools
to realize that like, hey, if something's evolved, that
doesn't mean that that thing is inevitable, there are
Many possible points of intervention here. Again, the geneticists
know this, they've been dealing with this for a
long time, but, you know, this is a place
that like, my lab is, is heading these days,
trying to figure out, like, how exactly do people
think about whether a thing can be changed or
not when they learn it's biological, and what can
we do as scientists to give people the tools
that, you know, help them to, to be able
to make the changes where they want to be
able to make changes.
Yeah, and it's not just that it's not inevitable,
but I guess it's also not impermeable to environmental
inputs, right? Because I mean, there's, there's also the
way we develop our, for example, the attachment styles
that we develop, the kinds of people that we
meet, the culture that we live in, even the,
the sort of economic circumstances we live, and so
on and so forth, and I guess even uh
within a. Given relationship, the way that the relationship
dynamics play out over time,
right? Yeah, that's exactly right. And look, I, I
can hear, you know, evolutionary psychologists screaming at me
right now, saying like, but we don't tell them,
then it's inevitable. We tell them that there are
other important environmental forces. And my response to that
is, yes, I know, but we now know that
people aren't hearing that part of the message. And
what we need to be doing, what we need
to be doing is using our powers of experimentation
and scientific study to figure out what do we
need to do to craft the messages, so that
folks do understand what what exactly what you just
said. That like, even if there were a biological
cause, it doesn't mean it's inevitable, it doesn't mean
that other forces don't matter. Like, what are things
we can do to encourage more of that kind
of scientific and evolutionary literacy among people? Because at
this point, I, I don't see another way of
combating what's happening online. I mean, it's very clear
that we're not gonna get like moderation of online.
Content in any meaningful way anytime soon. So, you
know, we're the people that talk about this stuff.
It's important for us to talk about this stuff,
but let's also, like, try to figure out how
can people be more receptive to what we mean
when we talk about evolutionary processes like this, and,
and sort of improve scientific education in the process.
So I have one last topic I would like
to ask you about. What do you think, uh,
or do you think that, uh, what we've talked
about here could have implications? I mean, do you
think that the knowledge coming from relationship science could
have implications as to how people can approach dating
and relationships in industrialized and post-industrial societies, particularly in
the 21st century?
Yeah, I mean, I, I think that, um, the
close relationships field, relationship science more broadly, there's a
lot of potential for good here. And to the
extent that we're able to remind people of the
value of hanging out in small networks, remember to
meet your neighbors, meet. Friends of friends. I, I,
there's another thing that you see too happening is
like, oh, people still have their in-person friends, but
they don't do like the group things anymore. They
don't meet the friends of friends anymore. It's, you
know, it's, it's all one on one. It look,
one on one can have a lot of value.
But, I think what our science does well, is
we are really wedded to the idea that there
is something critical and special about what it feels
like to interact with another person face to face,
what it is like when you interact with the
same people over and over again on multiple occasions,
and of course, the importance of Opening yourself up
to another person, being vulnerable, to even being willing
to take on some of their needs as your
own, to not keep score so much about exactly
who is doing what in this relationship, who is
getting the best deal, but rather, like, being part
of a community, being part of a community of
two, even if it's just the two of you.
And the these are gonna be healthy avenues for
the future. Healthy avenues for people's, you know, uh,
well-being going forward. So, I think there are a
lot of good lessons in this science that people
can take. Um, IT, it's not all bleak out
there. There, there are a lot of wonderful things
that people get from their close relationships, you know,
even if, not especially their relationships that aren't necessarily
romantic. Like there's a lot to be said for
getting together with, with close friends and kind of
seeing where the night takes you. So, you know,
this is relationship science to me, and, and I
have a lot of optimism about it going forward.
Great, so let's end on that positive note then
and the book is again Bonded by Evolution, The
New Science of Love and Connection. I'm of course
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. Um, AND Doctor Eastwick, just before we
go, apart from the book, where can people find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, so if you wanna uh hear more from
me, uh, I host a podcast uh with Eli
Finkel called Love Factually, and on the podcast, we,
uh, talk about these themes, but as they appear
in popular rom-coms and other romantic films. So, um,
you know, uh, come to the Love Factually feed,
find a movie, you know, and, uh, and catch
up with us there.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been great
to talk with you again.
Thanks so much for having me, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.